docs: clarify PromQL interval changes (#15824)
prometheus/prometheus: docs/migration.md

## PromQL

> ### Regexes match newlines

Reviewer: Let's not use an abbreviation in the headline

The `.` pattern in regular expressions in PromQL matches newline characters.
With this change a regular expressions like `.*` matches strings that include
`\n`. This applies to matchers in queries and relabel configs.

For example, the following regular expressions now match the accompanying
strings, whereas in Prometheus v2 these combinations didn't match.
    - `.*` additionally matches `foo\n` and `Foo\nBar`
    - `foo.?bar` additionally matches `foo\nbar`
    - `foo.+bar` additionally matches `foo\nbar`

If you want Prometheus v3 to behave like v2, you will have to change your
regular expressions by replacing all `.` patterns with `[^\n]`, e.g.
`foo[^\n]*`.

### Intervals return a predictable number of points

Interval selectors are now more predictable than they were previously, always

> returning the same number of points regardless of query alignment.

Reviewer: That's not true in general, not even for sub-queries. (If you say `[5m:2m]`, you might get two or three samples, depending on alignment.)

As said, I think starting with "predictable number of samples" is not a suitable starting point. It's just one specific outcome of this in cases like `[5m:1m]`.

Author: what do you think is the better way to describe the benefit of the new system?

Author: tried rewording

Reviewer: The benefit of the new system is manifold. It depends on your specific use case what aspects are most important.

Therefore, I would indeed first state that ranges are left-open now. The rest follows.

For example, if I evaluate `foo[1m]` now and 1m ago, I would expect to get a completely distinct set of samples. However, that was not true in v2 if and only if there was a sample at precisely 1m ago. So the behavior is much more benign now, but saying that "the number of samples is predictable" now would be misleading. It was predictable even before, just that it needed more data to predict.

Author: tried again

Lookback and range selectors are now left-open and right-closed (previously
left-closed and right-closed). This change affects queries when the evaluation
time perfectly aligns with the sample timestamps.

For example, assume we are querying a timeseries with evenly spaced samples
exactly 1 minute apart. Before Prometheus v3, a range query with `5m` would
usually return 5 samples. But if the query evaluation aligns perfectly with a
scrape, it would return 6 samples. In Prometheus v3 queries like this will

> always return 5 samples.

Reviewer: "always" → only with perfectly even spacing (like in subqueries or test cases or even quite often in real-world casas, but not always)

This change may affect subqueries that unintentionally relied on the old

> behavior. Query front-ends often align subqueries to multiples of the step size.

Reviewer: front-ends → frontends (appears way more common to me).

## PromQL

### Regular expressions match newlines

The `.` pattern in regular expressions in PromQL matches newline characters.
With this change a regular expressions like `.*` matches strings that include
`\n`. This applies to matchers in queries and relabel configs.

For example, the following regular expressions now match the accompanying
strings, whereas in Prometheus v2 these combinations didn't match.
    - `.*` additionally matches `foo\n` and `Foo\nBar`
    - `foo.?bar` additionally matches `foo\nbar`
    - `foo.+bar` additionally matches `foo\nbar`

If you want Prometheus v3 to behave like v2, you will have to change your
regular expressions by replacing all `.` patterns with `[^\n]`, e.g.
`foo[^\n]*`.

> ### Intervals return a predictable number of points

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Range selectors and lookback exclude samples coinciding with the left boundary
```

> Lookback and range selectors are now left-open and right-closed (previously
> left-closed and right-closed), which makes their behavior more predictable. This
> change affects queries when the evaluation time perfectly aligns with the sample
> timestamps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lookback and range selectors are now left-open and right-closed (previously
left-closed and right-closed), which makes their behavior more consistent. This
change affects queries where the left boundary of a range or the lookback delta
coincides with the timestamp of one or more samples.
```

For example, assume we are querying a timeseries with evenly spaced samples
exactly 1 minute apart. Before Prometheus v3, a range query with `5m` would
usually return 5 samples. But if the query evaluation aligns perfectly with a
scrape, it would return 6 samples. In Prometheus v3 queries like this will
always return 5 samples given even spacing.

> This change may affect subqueries that unintentionally relied on the old
> behavior. Query frontends often align subqueries to multiples of the step size.

Reviewer: Even if you have relied _intentionally_ on the old behavior, you have to do something now. :)

Maybe something like the following (although I'm not happy that things get more verbose here):

```suggestion
This change will typically affect subqueries because their evaluation timing is naturally
perfectly evenly spaced and aligned with timestamps that are multiples of the subquery resolution.
Furthermore, query frontends often align subqueries to multiples of the step size. In combination,
this easily creates a situation of perfect mutual alignment, often unintended and unknown by the user,
so that the new behavior might come as a surprise.
```

Before Prometheus V3 a subquery of `foo[1m:1m]` on such a system might have
always returned two points, allowing for rate calculations. In Prometheus V3,
however, such a subquery will only return one point, which is insufficient for a
rate or increase calculation.

Such queries will need to be rewritten to extend the window to properly cover
more than one point. In this example, `foo[2m:1m]` would always return two

> points no matter the query alignment. The exact form of the rewritten query may

Reviewer: (again assuming even spacing)

depend on the intended results and there is no universal drop-in replacement for

> queries whose behavior has changed.

Reviewer: Maybe we can drop in here that the under the prerequisite of even spacing, `[2m:1m]` is now the universally correct form of getting exactly two samples, while previously, there was no such thing, and `[1m:1m]` only worked because the other alignments all happened to work in your favor.

Reviewer: Since this form is just for a sub-query, we can even assume even spacing. Maybe mentioning that the underlying time series must actually have eligible samples for the sub query to evaluate to something. (When we say "this is always correct', my brain just switches into pedantic mode. "Always – a word momentous calmly hast thou spoken".)

Author: this refers to the specific example above which does assume even spacing
